# 2. Brief explanation of Linux file structure

- - -

Linux is based on the Unix family of operating systems. Unlike the other major operating system families (namely, Microsoft's "Windows" family and Apple's "OS X"), Linux is open-source. It is often favored for enterprise-level and specialist purposes, due to its robust security features and incredibly flexible customizability. These benefits often come at the expense of Linux requiring users to be more technically fluent than with Windows or OS X. It is worth noting that OS X is ALSO derived from Unix, but most low-level Unix functionality is obscured from the users by a graphical interface that is more friendly to non-technical users. However, OS X powerusers can apply many of the techniques taught in this tutorial to Apple computers, as well, with similar results.

Although Linux is considered its own distinct operating system, there are many 'distributions' of Linux available to users. A distribution is a specific way of packaging Linux along with different pre-installed software packages, without heavily altering the core of the operating system. Some examples of distributions are Ubuntu, Fedora, Linux Mint (a sub-distribution of Ubuntu), SuSe, Red Hat, and many more. Each is geared towards a specific purpose - while Ubuntu is meant to be user-friendly and a good general purpose distribution, Red Hat comes with software that makes it far more useful to large-scale enterprise applications. The distribution that THIS tutorial is built on is the System Rescue CD, which is highly portable and ideally suited to working with computers that have failing hard drives and corrupt filesystems.

With that boring stuff out of the way, let's actually take a look at the way Linux is organized...

- - -

## File structure

Linux files are organized hierarchically, like all other operating systems. The top level (known also as the `root` directory) directory is represented as a single `/`. All sub-directories are appended after the `/` that represents the root directory. For example, the path `/home/jdromano/` represents the folder `jdromano`, which is within the folder `home`, which is within the root directory. NOTE: forward slashes are used to separate nested directories, unlike in Windows, which uses back slashes (e.g., `C:\Windows\System32\...`).

Although the overall file structure varies widely between different distributions, the following folders are virtually always found within the root directory, and should NOT be deleted/renamed/copied/moved under any normal circumstances:

`/bin` - Contains "binaries" - regular executable programs 

`/sbin` - Contains system binaries. These are applications the system needs to function properly, and should typically not be modified by the user

`/etc` - Contains configuration files

`/dev` - Contains Device files. Here is where you will find devices such as USB drives and external hard drives, but the files they contain cannot be accessed here. Rather, they need to be "mounted" - more on that later.

`/tmp` - Contains temporary files

`/usr` - Contains user programs. `/usr` and `/bin` are generally viewed as similar, and can overlap in their functionality.

`/home` - Contains the Home directories for each user. These Home directories are where users typically put documents, downloads, and other media. The contents of each user folder contained within `/home` are generally protected against access from other unauthorized users.

`/lib` - System libraries. These define the behavior of different programming languages - not of concern to most users who don't develop programs.

`/mnt` - Where you can manually mount removable devices. Again, we will cover this in-depth later.

`/media` - Where the system automatically mounts removable devices. As an example, when you insert a USB drive and a window pops up with the drive contents, that window is displaying a sub-directory of `/media`

`/root` - This is the home folder for the "Root user". Note that this is NOT contained within `/home`, unlike all other Home folders. More on the root user later.

There are other folders in the root directory, but they are generally of less concern to us than the ones listed above.

It is worth metioning that there is a common 'shortcut' to the current user's Home directory, in the form of `~/` (minus the quotes). As an example, if I'm logged into the "jdromano" account on my computer, the path `~/` is the short form of `/home/jdromano`. Likewise, `~/Downloads` would be the short form of `/home/jdromano/Downloads`.

## Questions
