# Miscellaneous `bash` and `zsh` features

`bash` is, by far, the most common Unix shell in standard usage. Another fairly popular shell is `zsh`, which I use regularly instead of `bash`. Both `bash` and `zsh` are typically installed on modern Linux and Unix operating systems (including OS X), but `bash` is set as the default shell almost always. If you have any doubts about which shell is in use, run the command `echo $0` and the name of the shell will be printed to the screen.

To switch the current shell, simply run the name of the other shell (assuming it is installed) as a typical command. For example, to use `zsh`, you just need to run the command `zsh`. However, you will be reset to the default shell when you close and reopen the terminal session. In order to make the change permanent, run the following command:

`chsh -s /bin/shell_name_here`

The change should take place when you restart your terminal emulator.

The standard features that we will discuss here are valid regardless of whether you are using `bash` or `zsh`, but I can't vouch for other Unix shells. Whichever shell you decide to use is primarily an aesthetic decision, and can be ignored if you aren't actively looking for new functionality to be added to your current command line. 

#### Special characters

There are a few special character strings that can make it easier to carry out certain tasks at the Unix command line.

`!!`: Double exclamation points are a placeholder for the last command run. If you need to add some details to the beginning or end of the previous command, just use `!!` in place of that previous command. The most common usage of this trick is when you get a "permission denied" error, because you forgot to precede a command with `sudo` when that command requires elevated permissions. That is, to quickly re-run a command with an additional `sudo` at the beginning, you only need to type `sudo !!`. This can save a whole lot of time, especially if the full command is really long.

`|`: This character is not a lowercase "L", an uppercase "i", or the number 1 - it is the "pipe" character, and is usually typed by holding Shift and pressing the `\` key. The name "pipe" is descriptive of its use in the terminal. By separating two commands on the same line with a `|`, you "pipe" the output of the first command into the second command. This is better demonstrated by example. Let's say you want to run the `grep` command (explained later on this page) on the lengthy output of the command `vim --version` in order to only display certain lines of the output. You would do this by running the command `vim --version | grep 'some_string'`.

`>`: The greater-than sign is similar to the usage of the pipe character, but instead of feeding the output of a command into a second command, it writes the output of the command to a specified file. Let's say you run some arbitrary command that returns a list of names, but instead of displaying those names to the screen, you want them saved in the file `~/Documents/names.txt`. This would be done by running `arbitrarycommand > ~/Documents/names.txt`.

#### Auto-complete

I use `zsh`'s/`bash`'s auto-complete functionality constantly. When you're typing a file path out, it will save the time of having to type every single character, which can speed up your workflow considerably (particularly if you are typing out a ton of really long file paths). In order to do this, simply type the first part of the folder/file, and hit the Tab key. It works like this:

Let's say you are at the home directory, and you want to go to the `Developer` folder that is located in your home directory. Type `Dev`, then hit the Tab key, and it should automatically type `eloper/` for you, resulting in `Developer/`. You can keep doing this for each subdirectory to get many levels deep in just a few keystrokes.

Note that, if you don't type enough characters, and there are multiple folders/files in the current directory that begin with the characters you already typed, the shell will give you a list of possibilities to autocomplete. Keep pressing Tab to cycle through the possible entries, and select one using the Enter/return key. Also note that this only works for files/folders that are preceded by the appropriate path. Therefore, if you are in your Home directory and want to navigate to `/usr/local/bin/`, you can't just type `cd b`, then hit tab to auto-complete the `bin` directory. Rather, you need to type `cd /usr/local/b` then hit Tab to try and autocomplete it. You don't need to precede a directory with the full file path if you are already within the parent directory.
