# `sudo`, `chmod`, and permissions

All operating systems employ extensive measures to secure users' files. Linux, and other unix-based operating systems, are particularly well-known for having very robust security features. Configuring file permissions is one of the most basic ways to secure files, and it involves specifying which users are able to access and modify each file and/or directory on the system. Even though permissions on Linux work in a very logical manner, the sheer amount of customization available in regards to permissions make them very daunting and confusing to the majority of users. 

However, a few basic commands for working with permissions are necessary to anyone working from the Linux command line, and they're rather easy to master.


## The `sudo` command

Before the `sudo` command (which you have doubtless seen at least once) can be introduced, I should interject about the root user, also known as the superuser. Root is the name of an account built into all installations of any Unix operating system (including OS X!) by default, although it is generally disabled unless specified otherwise by the user. The root user has access to every file and directory on the system, and can modify them without limit. Even administrator accounts don't have the ability to modify many of the files that are required for the system to function, but the root user always can. As such, the root user can VERY easily wreak a lot of havoc on the system. Most Linux power-users will firmly state that you should NEVER log in as the root user. I stick with this methodology myself, with a few rarely-encountered reservations; when the owner of the computer does not know the existing administrator password, or when the file-system is damaged so much that the full graphical operating system won't boot. You may recall dealing with these two issues on Apple computers by booting into single user mode - single user mode is just Apple's own terminology for logging in as the root user.

At this point of the root user discussion, most people ask "so what am I supposed to do if I NEED root permissions?", and this is a very valid question. You need to have root permissions to update or install programs, and to make modifications to any user accounts, along with MANY other operations that you can encounter daily. The answer is to tell the root user to perform these actions on your behalf.

Enter the `sudo` command, which is short for 'superuser do' (as a side note, sudo is pronounced 'soo-doo', not like the work 'pseudo', but I digress...). Typically when a command you type results in an error that includes "Permission Denied", `sudo` can get around the error and execute the command successfully. The syntax for using `sudo` is: `sudo [command]`, where `[command]` can be any command you want - even one that doesn't require root permissions. For example, if you don't have the permissions to delete a file, `sudo rm /file/name/here` will successfully delete it. Just keep the following in mind: if an action requires root permissions, there is a reason why regular users aren't allowed to do it by default.

In order for a `sudo` command to work, you will have to enter a 'sudoer password' before the command will correctly execute. A sudoer password is typically the user account password for any administrator account on the machine, although this may vary a bit. To save the user a bit of time, the system will only require you to enter a sudoer password once every 5 minutes. This is why multiple `sudo` commands in quick succession usually only require a password the first time.

In general, when you start a program or service with the `sudo` command, that program or service will have root permissions to modify other external files for the duration of the program running.


## The `chmod` command

As I just alluded to, permissions aren't only important to you as the user of the computer, but also to running services and programs that modify files and directories on your behalf. `sudo` isn't always sufficient to getting around issues that arise as a result of inappropriate permissions. This will be seen often when you are trying to recover files from a dying hard drive. In these instances, the hard drive with the data you are trying to recover doesn't recognize you as a user on the system, and it won't want to allow you to modify its contents. The `chmod` command can be used to permanently change the file's permissions to sidestep these kinds of problems.

A basic `chmod` command can look like this:

`chmod 777 /file/name/here`

This will apply the permissions associated with the code 777 to the filename you specified. As it turns out, 777 grants full read and write access to ALL users, so the filename you specified will now be able to be deleted, changed, renamed, and moved by any user.

`chmod` is a very robust utility that can perform a vast array of permissions-related operations, but most of these go beyond the scope of this tutorial. Even for relatively experienced users, it is totally normal to have only a casual understanding of `chmod` and use Google to find the appropriate usage that best suits your current needs. Still, any user running `chmod` should be very careful - you can really easily screw things up by misusing `chmod`.


## Other commands dealing with permissions

`su` - As `sudo` stands for "superuser do", `su` simply stands for "superuser". When you run `sudo su`, you will get a root command prompt from which you can run commands as root without having to retype `sudo` constantly. I advise against using this, but it can occasionally be useful. Type `exit` to exit the superuser prompt and go back to your normal prompt.