# Working with external data volumes: mounting, copying, and file system architectures

This section of the tutorial is perhaps the most important in terms of the work we do in the CDC and Helpline, and the previous chapters can be seen as leading up to the subjects covered on this page.

When you plug an external hard drive, a hard drive from another computer, or any other mass-storage device into a computer, the files on it are not inherently accessible by the Linux operating system that you are using. This is because all Unix-based operating systems have a file structure that looks like a single tree, with ALL files stemming away from one root directory. The external storage device looks like its own tree, so you are not able to interact with it at first. 'Mounting' a hard drive is the process of essentially attaching the external device's root directory to a location on the main file system, so it becomes a part of the single-tree file structure

Back in the old days, when Linux was a good deal younger, all external file systems had to be mounted manually after connecting them to the Linux computer. Now, most installations of Linux are able to recognize when an external file system is attached, and are smart enough to automatically mount it to an appropriate location. However, when the external file system is damaged (such as a dying hard drive) or if you are stuck with a command line interface (which is what this guide assumes!), this automatic mounting often doesn't work.


## Mounting: Locations and naming conventions

Prior to mounting an external volume, it is still visible as a device, listed in the directory `/dev/` (which stands for "devices"). This is, for all intents and purposes, just a label that lets you know that there is something plugged in. If the label attached to the volume is `/dev/sdb1`, you cannot `cd` into that location to view the files on the device, because the label isn't a real directory. Instead, this label is used to specify <i>which</i> external file system you are trying to mount when you use the `mount` command.

The `mount` command is fairly intuitive. Standard syntax is `mount device_label mount_location`. You can pretty much specify any mount location you want, but convention dictates that you <i>should</i> put it in the `/mnt` directory. (Note also that many modern Linux distributions (including Ubuntu) have a `/media` directory. When you insert a device that is automatically mounted, this is the directory in which they will be mounted by Ubuntu. While you can manually mount volumes here, it's a better idea to do it in `/mnt` to avoid confusion.)

Let's walk through a standard mounting scenario. We want to pull some files off of a hard drive, and for whatever reason, the hard drive isn't automatically mounting when we plug it into a USB dock attached to a desktop running Ubuntu. However, since the drive is still working and readable, Ubuntu creates a drive label that you can use to mount it (NOTE: see next section on how to identify a drive's label). Let's say we identified the label as `/dev/sdb1`. We want to mount it in the directory `/mnt/BACKUP`. We can accomplish this with the command `mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt/BACKUP`. Now, to view the files on the drive, we can simply say `cd /mnt/BACKUP/`.


## Mounting: Identifying the drive label of a volume you need to mount manually

Sometimes, identifying the drive label can be tricky, especially since there are often a lot of items in `/dev`. There isn't one "right" way to determine which label corresponds to the device you plugged in, but the two following options are the ones I prefer:

1.) If `fsarchiver` is installed, the command `sudo fsarchiver probe` will list all devices plugged into the computer. The "Device" column shows the label (without the prepended `/dev/`).

2.) Alternatively, just see which entries in `/dev` change when you plug in the device. Run the command `ls -l /dev` without the device plugged in, and run it a second time after plugging in the device. Compare the two lists of files. If the second one contains `sdb` and `sdb1`, while the first one does not, it means that `sdb` is the label for the USB drive you plugged in, and `sdb1` is the label for the first (or only) partition on it. Therefore, use the command `mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt/BACKUP` to mount it.


## Copying: Copying entire volumes

Since mounted volumes preserve their file structure when mounted in Linux, copying the volume is often as simple as copying any other directory recursively (ex., `sudo cp -rv /mnt/source /mnt/destination`). However, there are instances where you <i>can't</i> simply do a single `cp` to copy the contents of a drive. There are numerous utilities that are designed to recover data from a damaged or otherwise inaccessible volume.


#### `fsarchiver`

`fsarchiver` is a utility primarily designed to archive a filesystem in a compressed format (although we mentioned that it can be used with the `probe` command to list drives/volumes, as well). For all intents and purposes, we use it to copy the full contents of a volume to a location on another volume. It is good for copying the contents of HFS+ or NTFS (OS X and NTFS filetypes, respectively), particularly when you want to store them as an archive on a file system of a different type. The syntax structure to archive a volume is `fsarchiver options command archivename filesystem_name`. One example of saving an NTFS filesystem named `my_hard_drive` to an archive named `archive` in the directory `~/Backups` would be: `fsarchiver -v savefs ~/archive ntfs`. There are many different options and commands available to choose from, so I strongly recommend reading the documentation (`man fsarchiver`) to see what is available to you.


#### `dd` and `ddrescue`

`dd` is a utility that will make a bitwise copy (i.e., it copies every single bit exactly as it is in the source - normally, the file gets slightly altered in various ways to make it compatible with the target directory) of a file or multiple files. As such, `dd` is useful for copying files that otherwise cannot be accessed, whether they are corrupt or otherwise non-functional (usually). We recommend that you stay away from `dd`, but know that it is a utility available to technicians with a fair amount of Linux experience (see Travis, Joe R., or Nicholai), and can be rather useful. Another common use for `dd` is to create bootable USB drives from a disk image (such as an `.ISO` or `.img` file). This can be done by simply specifying the source as the disk image and the destination as the (empty) USB drive. Often, users will specify the block size of the copying operation (it will say something like `bs=1m`), but that goes beyond the scope of this guide.

For reference, this is an example of correct `dd` usage:

`dd if=/path/to/source of=/path/to/destination bs=1m`

`ddrescue` is a utility that adds additional functionality to `dd`s feature set, further optimized to copy files from a damaged filesystem. In the case of disk read errors, `ddrescue` will 'try hard' (as stated by the documentation) to push past these errors. Again, it's not a bad idea to read through the documentation yourself, but ask a lead tech or supervisor before using this. It has the ability to screw things up if used incorrectly.


## File System Architectures

All volumes (hard drive partitions, USB flash drives, CDs/DVDs, network volumes, etc...) conform to a specific file structure. The file structure dictates how the files on the volume are physically laid out. It specifies how the computer indexes the locations of files on the hard drive. It also defines some other values, such as the maximum file size and how the drive platters are divided up into sectors, among other properties. All major operating systems behave differently in response to different file structures, so it is imperative that software technicians understand which file structures should be used and when, particularly when you are using a computer with one operating system to diagnose problems on a computer that runs a different operating system. We'll go over the basics of a few of the most common file structures:

#### FAT / FAT32

FAT stands for "File Allocation Table", which reflects how volumes of this file type assign file names to different areas on the hard drive. FAT volumes have a portion on the hard drive - eponymously named the "file allocation table" - that functions somewhat like a table of contents of the files that are stored on the volume, in that it maps a location on the drive to a human-readable file name. FAT is generally understood to be one of the simplest and oldest file systems still in common usage, and as a result, is recognized by virtually all major operating systems. For this reason, FAT is the recommended file structure for USB flash drives, since they are often passed around among multiple computers. 

You will often see the file type FAT32 instead of just FAT. The '32' indicates the number of bits in a table elements. You don't need to know what this means, specifically, but it results in a couple notable limitations. On a FAT32 volume, the maximum volume size is 2TiB, and any single file can only be a maximum of 4GB. If you need to transfer a file that is more than 2TiB in size, you will have to use something other than a FAT32-formatted USB drive to do the task. 

#### NTFS

NTFS stands for "New Technology File System", and is the standard file system type for all modern versions of Windows. NTFS is the successor to FAT32, and it improves on many of the technical limitations of FAT32. For all standard purposes, you don't have to worry about a maximum volume size or a maximum file size. Due to the more robust features of NTFS, it has a more complex overhead, and isn't fully compatible with most other operating systems as a result. 

Distributions of Linux generally have the ability to read NTFS without any additional software installed, but they can't write to NTFS unless you install third party software that allows you to do so. OS X can neither read from nor write to NTFS. Since it won't mount NTFS drives, the only indication you have that an NTFS volume is attached is by running Disk Utility - from the command line, you can list attached volumes (mounted or otherwise) by running the command `diskutil list`.

#### HFS+

HFS+ - the extended version of the file system HFS (Hierarchical File System) - is the standard for drives running OS X. You will often see HFS+ partitions listed as being "journaled" or "non-journaled". Journaling is a process that keeps simple changelogs for the file system in order to allow quicker recovery from crashes or power failures, and prevents volumes from becoming corrupted in those situations. Journaling is important to us because it can cause problems when you try to make modifications to a journaled volume from an external OS (such as when you try to recover/move files from a damaged HFS+ hard drive on another Mac or on a computer running Linux). If you do encounter problems working with the files, you can disable journaling by mounting the volume on a working instance of OS X and running the command `diskutil disableJournal /Volumes/volume_name_here`.

Journaling problems aside, Linux does have the ability to read from and write to HFS+ volumes, although it's not standard practice to actually put a Linux file system on an HFS+ formatted volume. Windows does not typically interact well with HFS+, but Apple's Boot Camp drivers for Windows do allow read-only access to HFS+ volumes.

#### Common Linux File Systems

The Linux kernel is compatible with many different file systems. Since we don't have to often diagnose issues on Linux computers, we won't go into full details here - literature is available online if you'd like to learn more about them. The most common types that you will see are EXT2, EXT3, and EXT4 (EXT is short for 'EXTended file system'), and although the differences are minimal, I usually use EXT4 for new Linux volumes, as it is the newest of the three. You might also come across XFS file systems, JFS, and (less-so) ReiserFS, among others.
